This website presents a condensed digital version of the exhibition _Caravans of Gold, Fragments in Time: Art, Culture, and Exchange across Medieval Sahara Africa_ and highlights some of the important objects that were featured in it. The exhibition was organized by the Block Museum of Art at Northwestern University, where it first appeared (January 26– July 21, 2019) before traveling to the Aga Khan Museum in Toronto, Canada (September 21, 2019 – February 23, 2020) and the Smithsonian Institute’s National Museum of African Art (April 8 – November 29, 2020).

_Caravans of Gold_ calls on what archaeologists have termed “the archaeological imagination”—the act of recapturing the past through surviving traces—to present a critical reframing of the medieval period (8th–16th centuries). It draws from sources that include material fragments from archaeological sites around the Sahara Desert and West Africa’s forest region; complete objects of the period that help us to understand what those fragments may have been like; texts written in Arabic that describe medieval West Africa from the perspective of scholars, diplomatics, geographers, and historians who were often writing from second- and third-hand information; and more recent artistic and cultural practices that have traceable connections to the medieval past. Together, these sources bring a new understanding to the medieval period and center Africa’s role in it.

### Credits

This project was conceptualized during the museum seminar “Reshaping an Exhibition: Preparing Caravans of Gold for Presentation in Africa,” taught by Dr. Kathleen Bickford Berzock at Northwestern University, Spring 2019. Sarah M. Estrela, Block Curatorial Graduate Fellow, assisted on the development of the app, which was built by Chris Diaz, Digital Publishing Services Librarian at Northwestern University Libraries. Undergraduate student contributors: Emily Andry, Lois Biggs, Meghan Clare Considine, Brian Rogers Cook, Zoe Detweiler, Brianna Heath, Nicholas Liou, Mina Milaz, Joely Simon, Cindy Qian, Elizabeth Zhang.
